KISS. 

It’s simple.  All the rules we use now, add the FR lights, when the system is active, merge within two intersections if a civilian, until first responder lighting system is deactivated, only after the next intersection which it’s off (ensures no accidental collisions with FRs during their operation of the system, then civilians can simply and easily merge back, if all FRLS are active across all lanes in an intersection, those cars along those lanes must remain stationary - otherwise civilians should continue as they usually would after merging until first responders pass them, and the FRLS is deactivated behind them after each intersection passed, afterwords, traffic resumes as usual, safer for everyone, with lives saved.  

Unless I’m missing something - this guarantees safety and efficiency for everyone on the road - civilians know where they stand and what to do and when to do it, allowing faster travel by our first responders, thereby leading them to save lives and use those freedom horses all at once. 

Biggest issues are: Unless someone merges when the system is active into an active lane, and causes a severe and sudden accident with our FRs 

or a FR can’t somehow drive efficiently in these optimal conditions to their destinations (which.. common. Anyone could do that so that’s not a reason to not do it, the volume of lives saved must have a good reason to be ignored)

the fact most roads are grids without major corners (some country’s like England may have adaption issues for speed here when it comes to their corners) it’s as if we are already set up for such a system, just needed the invention. 

Little infrastructure cost and or changes, even if adding buffer lines to be used to give more room to the now by citizens if people are worried about the now faster first responders (even though it’s a logical fallacy, they’ve already drove fast, just traffic often held them up in between their high speeds), faster first responders, is still minuscule in terms of efficiency and lives saved. 

And the fact is, the system turns off directly behind them FRs, so the longest wait is for the people at the end of the FR route, while the beginning of the route has very little impact. In addition, FR usually are within a range distributed to achieve faster response times, meaning, more of often than not, the system won’t remain active for long most the time anyways if used. 

And lastly — fuck mass shooters and terrorist - this is just as much a weapon against them as it is a tool for us. 
